Just as the Marginal Revolution seemed to hinge on diminishing marginal utility, so too did the logarithmic utility function, proposed by Bernoulli. Taken together, these two sets of ideas may be seen as implying that utility can somehow be measured, and that in any reasonable such method of scaling and measuring, there will be some form of diminishing marginal utility.

Taking their lead from these insights, the major economists of the nineteenth century began to focus their energies on understanding how use-value, costs-of-production and exchange-value were related to the utilities experienced by decision makers. Their implicit goal was to understand how changes in society impacted the net utilities (also often called the welfare) of citizens in an attempt to design better societies. By the middle of the century many of these theories had become quite byzantine, with very detailed explanations of how the internal utility-specifying processes of decision makers interacted with the outside world to yield choices and hence individual levels of welfare. But critically, all of these theories were brought to a crashing halt at the end of the nineteenth century by the next revolution in the economic theory of choice, the Ordinal Revolution initiated by Vilfredo Pareto (1906).

Pareto noted that while contemporary theories rooted in diminishing marginal utility relied on the very precise details of the functions that related things like use-value and scarcity to utility, there was no independent evidence that utility existed, nor was there any evidence to support the assumption that people were acting to maximize their utilities. He even went so far as to prove mathematically that there was, in principle, no way to directly derive a unique value for utility from the choice behavior of a subject – a critical point the economists of the marginal revolution had entirely missed. All of these theories were, he proved, houses of cards built on layers of assumptions that could not be proven. What he stressed emphatically was that the only things traditional economists could observe and measure were choices and prices. Focusing on anything else was, he argued, placing theory before data. Even worse, as he developed this logic he was able to show that the precise numerical scaling of utilities on which these theories rested were almost unconstrained by actual data on choices and prices due to this critical flaw in their reasoning.

To understand this issue, consider a decision maker who is empirically observed to prefer Apples to Oranges, Oranges to Grapes and Apples to Grapes. In the language of economics we represent those observed preferences in the following way:
